MAJOR FUNDING
FOR THIS PROGRAM PROVIDED BY
THE FORD FOUNDATION,
A RESOURCE
FOR INNOVATIVE PEOPLE
AND INSTITUTIONS WORLDWIDE,
AND THE CORPORATION
FOR PUBLIC BROADCASTING.
ADDITIONAL FUNDING
PROVIDED BY THESE FUNDERS --
IT IS ALL AROUND US.
IT IS AN ILLUSION,
AND YET PROFOUNDLY REAL.
WHAT WE PERCEIVE AS RACE
IS ONE OF THE FIRST THINGS
WE NOTICE ABOUT EACH OTHER --
SKIN -- DARKER OR LIGHTER.
EYES -- ROUND OR ALMOND.
BLUE, BLACK, BROWN.
HAIR -- CURLY, STRAIGHT, BLONDE,
OR DARK.
AND ATTACHED
TO THESE CHARACTERISTICS
IS A MOSAIC OF VALUES,
ASSUMPTIONS,
AND HISTORICAL MEANINGS.
EVEN THOSE OF US WHO CLAIM
WE DON'T BELIEVE THE STEREOTYPES
CAN EASILY RECITE THEM.
Man: THE AVERAGE PERSON
ON THE STREET THINKS THAT RACE
CONSISTS OF DIFFERENCES
IN PHYSICAL APPEARANCE.
THEY ALSO THINK
THAT FROM LOOKING AT
A PERSON'S PHYSICAL APPEARANCE
THAT THEY CAN FIND OUT OR KNOW
MORE SUBTLE THINGS ABOUT THEM.
RACE IS NOT A LEVEL
OF BIOLOGICAL DIVISION
THAT WE FIND
IN ANATOMICALLY MODERN HUMANS.
THERE ARE NO SUBSPECIES
IN THE HUMAN BEINGS
THAT LIVE TODAY.
AND THAT'S QUITE SHOCKING
TO A LOT OF INDIVIDUALS.
WHEN YOU LOOK
AND YOU THINK YOU SEE RACE,
TO BE TOLD THAT NO,
YOU DON'T SEE RACE,
YOU JUST THINK YOU SEE RACE,
THAT, YEAH, IT'S BASED
ON YOUR CULTURAL LENS.
THAT'S EXTREMELY CHALLENGING.
Narrator: JUST BECAUSE RACE
ISN'T A BIOLOGICAL REALITY,
DOESN'T MEAN IT ISN'T REAL.
BEING CLASSIFIED AS ASIAN
OR BLACK OR LATINO
HAS NEVER CARRIED THE SAME
ADVANTAGES IN OUR SOCIETY
AS BEING WHITE.
Man: RACE IN ITSELF
MEANS NOTHING.
THE MARKERS OF RACE --
SKIN COLOR, HAIR TEXTURE,
THE THINGS THAT WE IDENTIFY
AS THE RACIAL MARKERS
MEAN NOTHING, UNLESS THEY ARE
GIVEN SOCIAL MEANING,
AND UNLESS THERE'S PUBLIC POLICY
AND PRIVATE ACTIONS
THAT ACT UPON
THOSE KINDS OF CHARACTERISTICS.
THAT CREATES RACE.
Narrator: PHYSICAL DIFFERENCES
DON'T MAKE RACE.
WHAT MAKES RACE
ARE THE LAWS AND PRACTICES
THAT AFFECT LIFE CHANCES
AND OPPORTUNITIES
BASED ON THOSE DIFFERENCES.
IF WE LOOK CAREFULLY,
WE CAN SEE HOW OUR INSTITUTIONS
AND POLICIES
HAVE ASSIGNED RACIAL IDENTITIES
AND REINFORCED RACIAL INEQUALITY
THROUGHOUT THE 20th CENTURY.
Woman: AND THIS IS
SOMETHING I THINK
THAT ALL IMMIGRANT GROUPS
EXPERIENCE IN ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
WHEN THEY COME TO AMERICA,
NO MATTER
WHAT POINT IN TIME IT IS.
BECAUSE THEY COME TO A COUNTRY
THAT HAS HISTORICALLY
ALWAYS BEEN HIGHLY RACIALIZED.
IT'S A COUNTRY WHERE RACE
HAS ITS ORIGINS IN SLAVERY
AS WELL AS IN THE CONQUEST
OF NATIVE AMERICAN INDIANS.
SO, ANYBODY COMING FROM
THE OUTSIDE AFTER THAT POINT
HAS TO FIT INTO THIS
RACIALIZED SOCIETY IN SOME WAY.
AND IT'S NOT ALWAYS CLEAR
HOW PEOPLE ARE GOING
TO FIT IN RIGHT AWAY.
Narrator: AT THE START
OF THE 20th CENTURY,
AS MILLIONS OF IMMIGRANTS
ARRIVED FROM ALL OVER THE WORLD,
LAWMAKERS AND SOCIAL
SCIENTISTS DEBATED
HOW ALL OF THEM,
INCLUDING THE NEW
EUROPEAN ARRIVALS,
WOULD FIT INTO THE HIERARCHY
OF RACES ALREADY HERE.
THEY CAME SEEKING
ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY,
FREEDOM, AND A FUTURE
FOR THEIR FAMILIES.
OF THE 23 MILLION NEWCOMERS
BETWEEN 1880 AND 1920,
THE VAST MAJORITY WERE FROM
EASTERN AND SOUTHERN EUROPE.
IMMIGRANTS OFTEN WORK
THE HARDEST,
POOREST PAYING,
AND MOST DANGEROUS JOBS,
ALONG WITH THE SO-CALLED
"INFERIOR RACES" ALREADY HERE --
BLACKS, MEXICANS, AND CHINESE.
Man: CITIES WITH
ENORMOUS SLUMS DEVELOPED
AS THE UGLY SIDE
OF INDUSTRIALIZATION.
UGLY BOTH IN TERMS
OF THE AESTHETIC
OF AMERICAN CITIES,
BUT ALSO UGLY IN TERMS OF
THE SOLIDIFYING
OF CLASS DIFFERENCES
AND CLASS TENSION.
AS ALL OF THOSE THINGS
BECAME APPARENT,
THE IMMIGRANT BECAME THE SYMBOL
FOR WHAT AMERICA
MIGHT BE BECOMING.
Narrator: BY 1910,
58% OF AMERICAN
MINING AND FACTORY WORKERS
WERE IMMIGRANTS.
LIKE MEXICANS
AND AFRICAN AMERICANS,
ITALIANS, SLAVS,
AND JEWS
WERE OFTEN DESIRED AS LABORERS,
BUT ALSO FEARED,
SEEN AS PROMISCUOUS,
LAZY, OR STUPID.
SOME SAW IT
AS A RACIAL INVASION.
CHARLES DAVENPORT,
A FAMOUS BIOLOGIST,
EXPRESSED THOSE FEARS IN 1911.
"THE POPULATION
OF THE UNITED STATES,"
WROTE DAVENPORT,
"WILL ON ACCOUNT
"OF THE GREAT INFLUX OF BLOOD
FROM SOUTH EASTERN EUROPE,
"RAPIDLY BECOME
DARKER IN PIGMENT,
"SMALLER IN STATURE,
"MORE GIVEN
TO CRIMES OF LARCENY,
"KIDNAPPING, ASSAULT, MURDER,
"RAPE, AND SEXUAL IMMORALITY.
"AND THE RATIO OF INSANITY
IN THE POPULATION
WILL RAPIDLY INCREASE."
Ngai:
AND THIS WAS ALSO A TIME
WHEN SCIENTIFIC RACE THEORY
BEGAN TO TAKE OFF,
AND PEOPLE BEGAN TO
LOOK AT SOCIETY,
AND LOOK AT GROUPS OF PEOPLE
IN MORE RACIALIZED TERMS.
SO, PEOPLE WERE PERCEIVED
AS BEING SEPARATE RACES.
SO YOU HAD KIND OF
A HIGHER ORDER OF WHITE RACES,
YOU KNOW,
WHICH WERE SEEN AS THE NORDICS,
AS OPPOSED TO WHAT
MANY OF THE NATIVISTS CALLED
THE LOWER RACES OF EUROPE.
Jacobson:
THERE ARE VARIOUS GROUPS
LIKE THE AMERICAN
BREEDERS ASSOCIATION,
THE EUGENICS RESEARCH
ASSOCIATION,
WHO NOT ONLY ARE DOING RESEARCH
ON VARIOUS RACIAL TYPES,
IN THIS CASE HEBREWS, SLAVS,
MEDITERRANEANS.
WHAT WE WOULD CALL NOW
THE CAUCASIAN RACE.
I WOULD BREAK IT DOWN
TO 35 OR 37
OR 45 RACES FOR STUDY.
AND A LOT OF THE LANGUAGE WAS
BEGINNING TO GET AT THE IDEA
THAT THOSE DIFFERENCES
WERE ACTUALLY
ROOTED IN REPRODUCTION,
THEY WERE ROOTED
IN INHERITABLE TRAITS,
THEY WERE HERITABLE,
THEY WERE BIOLOGICAL,
THEY WERE IMMUTABLE.
Narrator:
THE MORE THE NEWCOMERS
WERE FORCED INTO LOW-PAYING JOBS
AND DISEASED TENEMENTS,
THE MORE THESE CONDITIONS
WERE EXPLAINED
AS NATURAL CONSEQUENCES OF
THEIR INNATE RACIAL CHARACTER.
BIOLOGY WAS DESTINY.
WHICH SIDE OF THE RACIAL DIVIDE
YOU FOUND YOURSELF ON
COULD BE A MATTER
OF LIFE OR DEATH.
BETWEEN 1890 AND 1920,
2,500 AFRICAN AMERICANS
WERE LYNCHED IN THE SOUTH.
IN 1915, LEO FRANK,
A JEW LIVING IN ATLANTA,
WAS PULLED FROM JAIL
AND HANGED BY A MOB
FOR ALLEGEDLY
KILLING A WHITE GIRL.
WRITING ABOUT THE LYNCHING,
A BLACK JOURNALIST WONDERED,
IS THE JEW A WHITE MAN?
Ngai: SOME HISTORIANS
HAVE SUGGESTED THAT
THESE NEW IMMIGRANT GROUPS
FROM EUROPE
WERE IN BETWEEN PEOPLES,
THEY WERE IN
A TRANSITIONAL STAGE.
WHEN COMPARED TO
ANGLO-SAXON PROTESTANTS,
GROUPS SUCH AS ITALIANS OR JEWS
WERE SEEN AS NOT BEING
FULLY WHITE PERHAPS.
BUT WHEN COMPARED
TO AFRICAN AMERICANS
OR WHEN COMPARED TO ASIANS,
THEIR WHITENESS
BECAME MORE SALIENT,
BECAME MORE VISIBLE.
Narrator: COULD EUROPEAN ETHNICS
BECOME FULLY WHITE,
AND THUS, FULLY AMERICAN?
BY 1910, A NEW TERM
WAS ENTERING POPULAR CULTURE
TO DESCRIBE
THE TRANSFORMATION OF EUROPEANS.
THE PHRASE CAME FROM THE TITLE
OF A BROADWAY PLAY
BY ISRAEL ZANGWILL.
"GOD," SAID ZANGWILL,
"WOULD MELT DOWN
THE RACES OF EUROPE
"INTO A SINGLE PURE ESSENCE,
OUT OF WHICH
HE WOULD MOLD AMERICANS."
Man: SO, WHEN THE IRISH,
WHEN GERMANS,
WHEN ITALIANS WERE COMING
AND THEY DIDN'T
SPEAK THE LANGUAGE
AND THEY DIDN'T KNOW
THE CULTURE,
THE IDEA WAS THEY WILL
ASSIMILATE INTO AMERICAN-HOOD,
THEY WILL BECOME AMERICAN,
WHICH IN THE AMERICAN TRADITION
HAS MEANT
WHITE AMERICAN.
BUT THAT MELTING POT
NEVER INCLUDED PEOPLE OF COLOR.
BLACKS, CHINESE,
PUERTO RICANS, ET CETERA,
COULD NOT MELT INTO THE POT.
THEY COULD BE USED AS WOOD
TO PRODUCE THE FIRE FOR THE POT,
BUT THEY COULD NOT BE USED
AS MATERIAL TO BE MELTED
INTO THE POT.
Narrator: WHITENESS
WAS KEY TO CITIZENSHIP.
IN 1790,
CONGRESS HAD PASSED AN ACT
DECLARING THAT ONLY
FREE WHITE IMMIGRANTS
COULD BECOME
NATURALIZED CITIZENS.
AFTER THE CIVIL WAR,
NATURALIZATION WAS EXTENDED
TO PERSONS
OF AFRICAN DESCENT AS WELL.
BUT IT WAS THE WHITE CITIZEN
WHO HAD CLEAR ACCESS
TO THE VOTE,
SAT ON JURIES,
WAS ELECTED TO PUBLIC OFFICE,
AND HAD BETTER JOBS.
WHITENESS WAS NOT SIMPLY
A MATTER OF SKIN COLOR.
TO BE WHITE
WAS TO GAIN THE FULL REWARDS
OF AMERICAN CITIZENSHIP.
Woman: IN ORDER TO BE
A NATURALIZED CITIZEN
IN THIS COUNTRY,
YOU HAD TO BE CATEGORIZED
AS WHITE OR BLACK,
AND ALMOST EVERYBODY
WHO TRIED TO NATURALIZE,
ALL BUT I THINK ONE CASE
THAT WENT TO THE SUPREME COURT,
ALL OF THEM WERE PEOPLE TRYING
TO BE CATEGORIZED AS WHITE.
SO THE COURT
HAD TO MAKE DECISIONS ABOUT
WHO WAS WHITE AND WHO WAS NOT.
Narrator: COURTS AND LEGISLATORS
HAD LONG BEEN IN THE BUSINESS
OF CONFERRING RACIAL IDENTITIES.
IN THE SOUTH, TO ENFORCE
JIM CROW SEGREGATION
AND LAWS AGAINST
MIXED MARRIAGES,
COURTS HAD TO FIRST DETERMINE
WHO WAS BLACK UNDER LAW.
Man: AND HERE IS WHERE
IT REALLY GETS INTERESTING.
YOU GOT SOME PLACES,
FOR EXAMPLE, VIRGINIA.
VIRGINIA LAW
DEFINED A BLACK PERSON
AS A PERSON
WITH 1/16th AFRICAN ANCESTRY.
NOW, FLORIDA DEFINED
A BLACK PERSON
AS A PERSON
WITH 1/8th AFRICAN ANCESTRY.
ALABAMA SAID YOU'RE BLACK
IF YOU GOT ANY BLACK ANCESTRY,
ANY AFRICAN ANCESTRY AT ALL.
BUT YOU KNOW WHAT THIS MEANS?
YOU CAN WALK ACROSS A STATE LINE
AND LITERALLY,
LEGALLY, CHANGE RACE.
NOW, WHAT DOES RACE MEAN
UNDER THOSE CIRCUMSTANCES?
YOU GIVE ME THE POWER,
I CAN MAKE YOU
ANY RACE I WANT YOU TO BE,
BECAUSE IT IS
A SOCIAL POLITICAL CONSTRUCTION.
Narrator: IN 1909,
AMERICAN COURTS HAD THAT POWER.
THAT YEAR, THE U.S. COURT
OF APPEALS IN MASSACHUSETTS
RULED THAT ARMENIANS,
OFTEN CLASSIFIED
AS ASIATIC TURKS,
WERE LEGALLY WHITE.
IF ARMENIANS
COULD BE DESIGNATED WHITE,
WHAT OF THE OTHER
SO-CALLED ASIATIC RACES?
FILIPINOS,
SYRIANS,
THE JAPANESE?
COULD THEY ALSO
PETITION SUCCESSFULLY
TO BE DESIGNATED WHITE
BY THE COURTS,
AND THUS BECOME AMERICANS?
IN 1922, WHEN JAPANESE
BUSINESSMAN TAKAO OZAWA
PETITIONED THE SUPREME COURT
FOR NATURALIZATION,
MANY IN THE JAPANESE COMMUNITY
BELIEVED HIS
WAS THE PERFECT TEST CASE.
Ngai:
TAKAO OZAWA CAME FROM JAPAN,
WENT TO THE UNIVERSITY
OF CALIFORNIA AT BERKELEY
FOR A FEW YEARS,
THEN MOVED TO HAWAII
WHERE HE HAD A FAMILY,
AND HE APPLIED
TO BECOME
A NATURALIZED CITIZEN IN 1915.
Woman: MY FATHER WROTE
HIS OWN BRIEF AND EVERYTHING,
AND HE WAS REALLY DEVOTED,
HE WANTED TO BECOME
AN AMERICAN CITIZEN.
AND NOTHING WOULD STOP HIM.
HE WAS DETERMINED.
Narrator:
JAPANESE GROWERS IN CALIFORNIA
WATCHED OZAWA'S CASE CLOSELY.
BY 1920, A SERIES
OF ALIEN LAND ACTS
PROHIBITED MANY NON-CITIZENS
FROM OWNING OR LEASING LAND.
WITHOUT A LEGAL DESIGNATION
OF WHITENESS
TO MAKE THEM CITIZENS,
JAPANESE IMMIGRANTS
COULD NOT HAVE
THE FULL PROTECTION
OF AMERICAN LAW,
NO MATTER HOW LONG
THEY LIVED IN THE COUNTY.
IN HIS BRIEF,
OZAWA ARGUED THAT HIS SKIN
WAS AS WHITE
AS ANY SO-CALLED CAUCASIAN,
IF NOT WHITER.
BUT HE MADE A MUCH MORE
IMPORTANT SECOND ARGUMENT.
BUT HIS SECOND ARGUMENT WAS
THAT RACE SHOULDN'T MATTER
FOR CITIZENSHIP.
WHAT REALLY MATTERED
WAS A PERSON'S BELIEFS.
Narrator:
"MY HONESTY AND INDUSTRIOUSNESS
"ARE WELL KNOWN AMONG
"MY JAPANESE
AND AMERICAN FRIENDS.
"IN NAME,
BENEDICT ARNOLD WAS AN AMERICAN,
"BUT AT HEART HE WAS A TRAITOR.
"IN NAME, I AM NOT AN AMERICAN,
"BUT AT HEART,
I AM A TRUE AMERICAN."
THE ARTICLES
WOULD COME OUT IN THE PAPER.
I THOUGHT, OOH,
WHAT DID HE DO, YOU KNOW?
I THOUGHT ONLY BAD THINGS
CAME OUT IN THE PAPER,
AND I WAS KIND OF ASHAMED,
YOU KNOW,
WHEN I WAS A CHILD.
AND IT WAS JUST THE WAY
WE WERE BROUGHT UP.
I DIDN'T HAVE
ANY ORIENTAL FRIENDS.
MY NEIGHBORS WERE ALL CAUCASIAN,
AND SO HE WAS SO DETERMINED
TO GET US --
WELL, WHEN THE TIME CAME,
TO BE AMERICAN CITIZENS.
Ngai: THE SUPREME COURT
RULED THAT OZAWA
COULD NOT BE A CITIZEN.
THEY SAID HE WAS NOT WHITE
WITHIN THE MEANING
OF THE STATUTE,
AND THEREFORE
NOT ELIGIBLE TO CITIZENSHIP.
AND THE COURT SAID,
WELL, HE'S NOT WHITE
BECAUSE HE'S NOT CAUCASIAN,
AND CAUCASIANS ARE WHITES.
HE DID EVERYTHING RIGHT.
HE LEARNED ENGLISH.
HE HAD A LIFESTYLE
THAT WAS AMERICAN.
HE WENT TO
CHRISTIAN CHURCH ON SUNDAY,
HE DRESSED AS A WESTERNER,
HE BROUGHT UP HIS CHILDREN
AS AMERICANS.
HE DID EVERYTHING
HE WAS SUPPOSED TO DO,
AND YET HE'S TOLD
THAT HE CAN'T BE A CITIZEN
BECAUSE HE'S NOT WHITE.
Narrator: THE COURT RULED
THAT ACCORDING TO
THE BEST KNOWN SCIENCE,
OZAWA WAS NOT CAUCASIAN,
BUT OF THE MONGOLIAN RACE.
BUT THE COURT WOULD NOT
BE BOUND BY SCIENCE
IN POLICING
THE BOUNDARIES OF WHITENESS.
ONLY THREE MONTHS AFTER OZAWA,
THE COURT TOOK UP THE CASE
OF BHAGAT SINGH THIND,
A SOUTH ASIAN IMMIGRANT
AND U.S. ARMY VETERAN
WHO PETITIONED FOR CITIZENSHIP
ON THE GROUNDS
THAT INDIANS WERE OF
THE ARYAN OR CAUCASIAN RACE,
AND THEREFORE WHITE.
AND HE MAKES
THE SCIENTIFIC ARGUMENT,
HAVING LEARNED SOMETHING,
ACTUALLY, FROM THE OZAWA CASE,
THAT HE IS CAUCASIAN.
HE GETS SCIENTIFIC AUTHORITY
TO SPEAK ON HIS BEHALF,
THAT IN FACT, SOUTH ASIANS ARE
INCLUDED IN THE CAUCASIAN RACE.
Ngai: SO HERE THE COURT
WAS IN A BIND,
BECAUSE THEY WERE PRESENTED WITH
SO-CALLED SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE
THAT INDIANS WERE CAUCASIAN.
AND THE COURT
SOLVED THIS PROBLEM BY SAYING
THAT IT DIDN'T MATTER WHAT
SCIENCE SAID, SO-CALLED SCIENCE.
THEY ACTUALLY SAID,
WHITE IS NOT SOMETHING THAT CAN
BE SCIENTIFICALLY DETERMINED,
BUT WHITE IS SOMETHING THAT IS
SUBJECTIVELY UNDERSTOOD
BY WHO THEY CALLED
THE COMMON PERSON,
THE COMMON MAN.
Narrator: "IT MAY BE TRUE,"
REASONED THE COURT,
"THAT THE BLONDE SCANDINAVIAN
AND THE BROWN HINDU
"HAVE A COMMON ANCESTOR IN
THE DIM REACHES OF ANTIQUITY,
"BUT THE AVERAGE MAN
KNOWS PERFECTLY WELL
"THAT THERE ARE UNMISTAKABLE
AND PROFOUND DIFFERENCES
BETWEEN THEM TODAY."
THE SAME COURT THAT USED SCIENCE
TO DETERMINE WHITENESS IN OZAWA
THREE MONTHS BEFORE,
NOW REFUTED
ITS OWN REASONING IN THIND.
THIND MIGHT WELL BE CAUCASIAN,
THE HIGH COURT SAID,
BUT HE WAS NOT WHITE.
THE JUSTICES NEVER SAID
WHAT WHITENESS WAS,
ONLY WHAT IT WASN'T.
THEIR IMPLIED LOGIC
WAS A CIRCULAR ONE.
WHITENESS WAS
WHAT THE COMMON WHITE MAN
SAID IT WAS.
Ossorio: THE COURT OFTEN DECIDED
WHO WAS WHITE AND WHO WASN'T
BASED ON WHETHER THEY FELT
THAT THE PERSON
WOULD POLITICALLY FIT WELL
INTO THE KIND OF SOCIETY
THAT WE WERE TRYING TO BUILD.
AND SOMETIMES IT WAS
PRETTY EXPLICIT
THAT THIS IS WHAT
THE COURT WAS DOING.
THERE WAS WIDESPREAD
RACIAL VIEWS
THAT ASIANS WERE UNDESIRABLE,
THAT THEY THREATENED
TO CONTAMINATE
THE AMERICAN SOCIETY.
BASICALLY THAT ASIANS
ARE TOO DIFFERENT,
THAT THEY CAN'T EVER REALLY
BECOME LIKE THE REST OF US.
Narrator: THE CONSEQUENCES
OF THE UNANIMOUS VERDICT
IN U.S. v THIND
WERE CATASTROPHIC
FOR THE INDIAN COMMUNITY.
SOUTH ASIANS WHO HAD NATURALIZED
BEFORE THE VERDICT
WERE STRIPPED OF THEIR
CITIZENSHIP AND PROPERTY.
VAISHO DAS BAGAI
WAS A SUCCESSFUL MERCHANT
WHO FLED
BRITISH TYRANNY IN INDIA
TO RAISE HIS FAMILY
IN A FREE COUNTRY.
AFTER HIS AMERICAN CITIZENSHIP
WAS REVOKED,
HE TOOK HIS OWN LIFE.
HE LEFT A SUICIDE NOTE
FOR HIS FAMILY
AND ANOTHER FOR THE PUBLIC.
"BUT NOW THEY COME AND SAY TO ME
"I AM NO LONGER
AN AMERICAN CITIZEN.
"WHAT HAVE I MADE OF MYSELF
AND MY CHILDREN?
"WE CANNOT EXERCISE OUR RIGHTS,
"WE CANNOT LEAVE THIS COUNTRY.
"HUMILITY AND INSULTS,
"BLOCKADES THIS WAY,
AND BRIDGES BURNED BEHIND."
FOR THE JAPANESE COMMUNITY,
THE VERDICTS IN THE OZAWA
AND THIND CASES
WERE EQUALLY DEVASTATING.
NOW, AS ALIENS
INELIGIBLE FOR CITIZENSHIP,
MANY GROWERS WERE UNABLE
TO PURCHASE OR EVEN LEASE LAND
TO STAY IN BUSINESS.
THOUSANDS OF ACRES WERE SEIZED
FROM JAPANESE IMMIGRANTS
AND SOLD TO WHITE FARMERS.
BY THE TIME
THE RACIAL REQUIREMENT
FOR NATURALIZATION
WAS FINALLY REMOVED IN 1952,
TAKAO OZAWA WAS LONG DEAD.
Ngai: THE NOTION THAT ASIANS
ARE RACIALLY UNASSIMILABLE,
AND THAT THEY'RE
INELIGIBLE TO CITIZENSHIP
BECAUSE OF THEIR RACE
IS SOMETHING
THAT I THINK HAS HAD
A REAL ENDURING EFFECT.
THE FACT THAT THEY WERE SEEN
AS NON-AMERICAN
ENABLED MANY AMERICANS
TO SEE THEM AS THE ENEMY
AND TO STRIP THEM TOTALLY
OF THEIR CIVIL LIBERTIES
AND TO PUT THEM
IN INTERNMENT CAMPS
DURING WORLD WAR II.
THE LEGACY OF THIS IDEA
IS THAT
EVEN THOSE WHO ARE
THIRD OR FOURTH GENERATION
ASIAN AMERICANS ARE
STILL PERCEIVED AS FOREIGNERS.
Narrator: IN 1924,
CONGRESS PASSED THE JOHNSON-REED
IMMIGRATION ACT,
WHICH EFFECTIVELY BANNED
ASIAN IMMIGRATION UNTIL 1965.
JOHNSON REED
ALSO CUT IMMIGRATION
FROM EASTERN AND SOUTHERN EUROPE
TO A TRICKLE.
YOUR BLOOD'S THE SAME AS MINE.
MINE'S THE SAME AS HIS.
DO YOU KNOW WHAT THIS
WONDERFUL COUNTRY IS MADE OF?
Narrator: WORLD WAR II
FOUND THE U.S. AT WAR
WITH NAZI GERMANY AND JAPAN.
FILMS LIKE THE 1945
OSCAR WINNING SHORT,
"THE HOUSE I LIVE IN,"
CALLED FOR NATIONAL UNITY
AND ETHNIC TOLERANCE.
♪ WHAT IS AMERICA TO ME?
♪ A NAME
Goodman:
AND THESE OTHER DISTINCTIONS
WHICH HAD CARRIED SO MUCH POWER
IN AN EARLIER PERIOD --
CELT, SLAV, ANGLO-SAXON,
STARTED TO FADE AWAY.
THEY HAD NO PURCHASE BECAUSE
THOSE DISTINCTIONS
DIDN'T SEEM TO HOLD THE KEY
TO ANY SOCIAL QUESTIONS THAT
WERE WORTH ANSWERING ANY MORE.
THE MORE IMPORTANT
AND MORE PRESSING
POLITICAL SOCIAL QUESTIONS
SEEMED TO HINGE
ON BLACK AND WHITE.
♪ ALL RACES AND RELIGIONS
Narrator: SINATRA'S SONG
WAS ONE OF TOLERANCE,
BUT THE LINE THAT SANG OF
"MY NEIGHBORS BLACK AND WHITE"
WAS CUT FROM THE FILM.
SO LONG, MEN.
BYE.
Narrator: EUROPEAN IMMIGRANTS
WERE LEARNING THAT WHITENESS
WAS MORE THAN SKIN COLOR,
IT WAS THE PRIVILEGE
OF OPPORTUNITY,
AND ABOVE ALL, EXCLUSIVE.
Goodman: THERE'S THIS WHOLE
VERY STANDARD NARRATIVE
OF THE EUROPEAN MOBILITY MODEL.
WE CAME HERE WITH NOTHING,
WE WORKED HARD,
WE PULLED OURSELVES UP
BY OUR BOOTSTRAPS.
AND IT'S OFFERED UP AS PROOF
OF THE OPENNESS
OF THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC ORDER.
Narrator:
LEFT OUT OF THE BOOTSTRAP MYTH
OF EUROPEAN ETHNICS
WAS ACCESS TO OPPORTUNITIES
CLOSED TO NON-WHITES.
ROOSEVELT'S NEW DEAL REFORMS
OFFERED MANY AMERICANS
A PATH OUT OF POVERTY.
Roosevelt:
THIS SOCIAL SECURITY MEASURE
GIVES AT LEAST SOME PROTECTION
TO 50 MILLIONS OF OUR CITIZENS.
Narrator: BUT THE ORIGINAL
SOCIAL SECURITY PROGRAM
EXCLUDED FARM WORKERS
AND DOMESTICS,
MOST OF WHOM WERE NON-WHITE.
AND MANY UNIONS
LOCKED BLACKS AND MEXICANS
INTO LOW-PAYING JOBS,
OR KEPT THEM OUT ALTOGETHER.
BUT PERHAPS THE BEST EXAMPLE
OF HOW EUROPEAN ETHNICS
WOULD FINALLY GAIN
THE FULL BENEFITS OF WHITENESS
CAME WITH
AN INNOVATION IN HOUSING
AT THE END OF WORLD WAR II.
IT WAS A TIME WHEN
HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
OF G.I.s CAME HOME,
READY TO START FAMILIES,
BUT HAD NO PLACE TO LIVE.
Man:
LIVING SPACE WAS AT A PREMIUM.
IN THE BRONX THEY TRIED
BUILDING QUONSET HUTS,
AND THEY TURNED TO SLUMS,
ALL THE QUONSET HUTS
JUST DISINTEGRATED.
THERE WERE TWO FAMILIES
SHARING A HUT.
ONE FAMILY AT ONE END,
ONE FAMILY AT THE OTHER,
AND BEFORE YOU KNOW IT,
THEY WERE AWFUL.
Announcer:
FHA CAME TO THE RESCUE
BY ENSURING LONG-TERM
LOW MONTHLY PAYMENT
MORTGAGE LOANS.
Narrator: VETERANS
NEEDED HOMES FOR FAMILIES.
THEY TURNED TO
A REVOLUTIONARY
NEW DEAL HOUSING PROGRAM.
IT WOULD RACIALIZE
HOUSING WEALTH AND OPPORTUNITY
FOR DECADES IN WAYS
FEW COULD HAVE IMAGINED.
Oliver: IN THE 1930s,
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT CREATED
THE FEDERAL HOUSING
ADMINISTRATION,
WHOSE JOB IT WAS
TO PROVIDE LOANS,
OR THE BACKING FOR LOANS,
TO AVERAGE AMERICANS,
SO THEY COULD PURCHASE A HOME.
Announcer:
DUE TO THE STIMULATION
OF THE NATIONAL HOUSING ACT,
FROM EVERY SECTION OF
THE COUNTRY COME REPORTS OF --
Oliver: IN ORDER
TO PURCHASE A HOUSE IN AMERICA
PRIOR TO THE 1930s,
YOU HAD TO PAY 50%
OF THE SALES PRICE
UP FRONT.
THE NEW TERMS
OF PURCHASING A HOME
WAS THAT YOU PUT
10% OR 20% DOWN
AND THE BANK FINANCED 80% OF IT,
NOT OVER FIVE YEARS,
BUT OVER 30 YEARS,
AT RELATIVELY LOW RATES.
THIS OPENED UP THE OPPORTUNITIES
FOR AMERICANS TO OWN HOMES
LIKE NEVER BEFORE.
THE AVERAGE PERSON
COULD OWN THAT HOME.
Narrator:
IF THESE TERMS SOUND FAMILIAR,
THEY SHOULD,
BECAUSE THIS IS ESSENTIALLY
THE SAME FINANCING SCHEME
THAT ALLOWS MOST AMERICANS
TO OWN THEIR HOMES TODAY.
FEDERAL PROGRAMS AND BANKS
SANK MILLIONS INTO
THE HOME CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY.
THEIR MESSAGE TO VETERANS --
YOU CAN AFFORD A NEW HOME,
BUY A NEW HOME NOW.
ON THE OUTSKIRTS
OF BALTIMORE, MEMPHIS,
CHICAGO, LOS ANGELES, DENVER,
AND OTHER CITIES,
BRAND-NEW COMMUNITIES SPRANG UP.
ONE OF THE MOST FAMOUS WAS
A LONG ISLAND POTATO FIELD,
TRANSFORMED INTO
17,000 NEW HOMES.
IT WAS CALLED LEVITTOWN.
TAX DOLLARS HELPED MAKE
THE SINGLE FAMILY HOME
A MASS-PRODUCED CONSUMER ITEM.
THE AMERICAN DREAM
HAD A NEW NAME --
SUBURBIA.
Juliano: YOU HAVE TO REMEMBER,
THE PEOPLE WHO CAME HERE
IN 1947, 1948,
WERE YOUNG EX-G.I.s
WHOSE UPPERMOST CONCERN WAS
TAKING ADVANTAGE
OF THE G.I. BILL
AND MAKING THINGS BETTER
FOR THEMSELVES.
Narrator:
BEFORE MOVING TO LEVITTOWN,
HERB KALISMAN AND HIS WIFE DORIS
LIVED IN A CRAMPED ATTIC
APARTMENT IN NEW YORK CITY.
Doris: AND WHEN WE BEGAN
TO LOOK FOR AN APARTMENT
WE FOUND THAT THE APARTMENTS
WERE 100, 125,
$150 A MONTH.
I KNOW
THAT'S UNBELIEVABLE TODAY,
BUT IT WAS
TOO EXPENSIVE FOR US.
AND OUT HERE IN LEVITTOWN,
THE MORTGAGE PAYMENTS
WERE $65 A MONTH.
[ TELEPHONE RINGING ]
THEY SAY YOUR KITCHEN
DAZZLES EVERY EYE.
♪ A BRAND-NEW SINK,
A BUILT-IN OVEN ♪
♪ A NEW REFRIGERATOR
AND A PHONE ♪
Juliano: IF YOU WERE BUYING
A LEVITT HOME
IN 1947, '48,
'49, '50, AND '51,
YOU WOULD GET --
THIS WOULD BE YOUR KITCHEN.
YOU WOULD GET A G.E. STOVE,
G.E. REFRIGERATOR,
AND A BENDIX WASH MACHINE.
IT WOULD BE PART
OF THE REAL ESTATE.
Man: WE CAME TO
LEVITTOWN AND WE
FOUND A MODEL HOUSE
AND WE WALKED IN
AND WE LOOKED AROUND.
AND, OF COURSE,
IN THE EYES OF A YOUNG MAN
WHO WAS RAISED IN THE GHETTO,
SO TO SPEAK,
IT WAS AN
INTERESTING EXPERIENCE,
AN INTERESTING LIFESTYLE,
SEEING ALL THE NEW
MODERN CONVENIENCES.
VERY FASCINATING.
Narrator:
EUGENE BURNETT CAME HOME
WITH ALMOST A MILLION
OTHER BLACK G.I.s.
THEY HAD FOUGHT FOR THE COUNTRY
IN SEGREGATED RANKS.
THEY RETURNED
HOPING FOR EQUALITY
AND THE AMERICAN DREAM.
FOR MANY,
THAT DREAM WAS A NEW HOME
FOR LITTLE MONEY DOWN,
AND SOME OF THE EASIEST
CREDIT TERMS IN HISTORY.
Eugene:
I WENT UP TO THE SALESMAN.
WE'RE INTERESTED
IN YOUR HOME,
WE'RE INTERESTED IN
BUYING ONE
AND WHAT
IS THE PROCEDURE?
IS THERE AN APPLICATION
TO BE FILLED OUT?
SO HE LOOKED AT ME,
LOOKED AROUND,
AND HE SAID TO ME, HE SAYS,
LISTEN, IT'S NOT ME,
BUT THE OWNERS OF THIS
DEVELOPMENT HAVE NOT,
AS YET, DECIDED
TO SELL THESE HOMES
TO NEGROES.
Bernice:
IT WAS AS THOUGH IT WASN'T REAL.
YOU CAN'T IMAGINE,
FOR SOMEONE TO COME OUT
AND ACTUALLY TELL YOU THAT
THEY CAN'T SELL TO YOU,
YOU KNOW?
I WAS REALLY ON A --
OH, MAN, LOOK AT THIS HOUSE,
CAN YOU IMAGINE HAVING THIS?
AND THEN FOR THEM TO TELL ME
BECAUSE OF THE COLOR OF MY SKIN
I CAN'T BE A PART OF IT?
Narrator:
THE FHA UNDERWRITERS WARNED
THAT THE PRESENCE OF EVEN ONE
OR TWO NON-WHITE FAMILIES
COULD UNDERMINE
REAL ESTATE VALUES
IN THE NEW SUBURBS.
THESE GOVERNMENT GUIDELINES
WERE WIDELY ADOPTED
BY PRIVATE INDUSTRY.
RACE HAD LONG PLAYED A ROLE
IN LOCAL REAL ESTATE PRACTICES.
STARTING IN THE 1930s,
GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS
INSTITUTIONALIZED
A NATIONAL APPRAISAL SYSTEM
WHERE RACE WAS AS MUCH A FACTOR
IN REAL ESTATE ASSESSMENT
AS THE CONDITION
OF THE PROPERTY.
USING THIS SCHEME,
FEDERAL INVESTIGATORS EVALUATED
239 CITIES ACROSS THE COUNTRY
FOR FINANCIAL RISK.
Oliver: SO THAT THOSE
COMMUNITIES THAT WERE ALL-WHITE,
SUBURBAN, AND FAR AWAY
FROM MINORITY AREAS,
THEY RECEIVED
THE HIGHEST RATING,
AND THAT WAS THE COLOR GREEN.
THOSE COMMUNITIES
THAT WERE ALL MINORITY
OR IN THE PROCESS OF CHANGING,
THEY GOT THE LOWEST RATING...
AND THE COLOR RED,
THEY WERE RED-LINED.
AS A CONSEQUENCE,
MOST OF THE MORTGAGES
WENT TO SUBURBANIZING AMERICA,
AND IT SUBURBANIZED IT RACIALLY.
Goodman: THE RACIAL LOGIC
ADOPTS THE PRINCIPLE THAT
AN INTEGRATED NEIGHBORHOOD
IS A BAD RISK,
IS A FINANCIAL RISK --
THAT AN INTEGRATED NEIGHBORHOOD
IS LIKELY TO BE
AN UNSTABLE NEIGHBORHOOD.
UNSTABLE SOCIALLY, BUT THEREFORE
ALSO UNSTABLE ECONOMICALLY.
Narrator:
WHEN THE WHITE RESIDENTS
OF EIGHT MILE ROAD IN DETROIT
WERE TOLD THEY WERE TOO CLOSE
TO A BLACK NEIGHBORHOOD
TO QUALIFY
FOR A POSITIVE FHA RATING,
THEY BUILT THIS SIX-FOOT WALL
BETWEEN THEMSELVES
AND THEIR BLACK NEIGHBORS.
ONCE THE WALL WENT UP,
MORTGAGES ON THE WHITE
PROPERTIES WERE APPROVED.
BETWEEN 1934 AND 1962,
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
UNDERWROTE
$120 BILLION IN NEW HOUSING.
LESS THAN 2% WENT TO NON-WHITES.
Bernice:
I CAN UNDERSTAND AN INDIVIDUAL
DEPENDING ON HIS ENVIRONMENT
OR HIS FAMILY OR WHATEVER
BEING RACIST,
BUT FOR YOUR COUNTRY
TO SANCTION IT,
GIVE HIM TOOLS TO DO THAT,
THERE'S SOMETHING
DEFINITELY WRONG THERE.
Herb Kalisman: I THINK WE HAD
THE GOLDEN CHANCE
AFTER WORLD WAR II
AND WE FLUBBED IT.
BECAUSE HERE WE HAD
A G.I. BILL THAT WAS,
YOU KNOW,
THAT WAS AVAILABLE TO EVERYBODY,
BUT IN A WAY THEY DIDN'T
MAKE IT AVAILABLE TO EVERYBODY.
AND THAT WAS
A GOLDEN OPPORTUNITY
IN THIS COUNTRY
AND WE MISSED IT,
WE REALLY MISSED IT.
Man: BUT YOU CAN ALWAYS TELL,
CAN'T YOU?
A TOWN WITH GOOD
REAL ESTATE PEOPLE
IS A MORE
SUBSTANTIAL COMMUNITY,
BECAUSE MORE PEOPLE
OWN THEIR OWN HOMES.
THAT'S RIGHT.
Man: AND NOW IT'S
SORT OF HARD TO BELIEVE
THAT THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
NATIONALIZED
AND INTRODUCED RED LINING.
IN A FUNNY WAY, IT WASN'T
JUST GIVING SOMETHING TO WHITES,
IT WAS CONSTRUCTING WHITENESS.
WHITENESS MEANT, AS IN THE PAST,
WHITE HAD MEANT BEING A CITIZEN
AND BEING A CHRISTIAN.
IT NOW MEANT
LIVING IN THE SUBURBS.
Narrator: ONLY 50 YEARS BEFORE,
EUROPEAN ETHNICS WERE BELIEVED
TO BE DISTINCT RACES.
NOW, IN THESE NEW
SEGREGATED NEIGHBORHOODS,
THEY BLENDED TOGETHER
AS WHITE AMERICANS.
Doris Kalisman: WE DID HAVE
DIFFERENT RELIGIOUS GROUPS,
WE WERE MIXED UP THERE,
BUT WE WERE
AN ALL-WHITE COMMUNITY,
AND I THINK
IT'S AN UNREALISTIC WORLD.
I THINK THERE'S
SOMETHING STERILE
ABOUT EVERYONE BEING
ON THE SAME ECONOMIC LEVEL
AND EVERYONE
BEING THE SAME COLOR.
Man:
IT CERTAINLY DOESN'T PROMOTE
A FEELING OF A WIDER WORLD --
WIDER, NOT WHITER --
TO LIVE IN A PLACE
WHERE THERE ARE ONLY PEOPLE
THAT LOOK LIKE YOU.
Narrator:
CARTOONIST BILL GRIFFITH
REMEMBERS MOVING FROM BROOKLYN
TO LEVITTOWN AS A KID.
Griffith: IT'S AN UNTENABLE,
ARTIFICIAL WORLD.
YOU'RE CREATING
A WEIRD UTOPIA IN A WAY,
A UTOPIA OF,
YOU KNOW,
MIDDLE-CLASS WHITE PEOPLE
WHO WERE TRYING TO DENY
THAT THEY WERE LIVING
IN A MULTI-RACIAL WORLD.
AND HOW LONG
CAN YOU KEEP THAT UP?
YOU CAN'T KEEP THAT UP FOREVER.
WHETHER THERE WERE
GOING TO BE BLACK PEOPLE
IN LEVITTOWN, WAS JUST --
IT WOULD BE
ALMOST THE EQUIVALENT OF SAYING
ARE THERE GOING TO BE
MARTIANS IN LEVITTOWN?
Powell: THE BASIC IDEA OF
WHITENESS IS WHO'S INCLUDED,
WHO'S PART OF THE FAMILY,
AND IT HAS
MATERIAL CONSEQUENCES.
BLACKS WEREN'T COMPLETELY
LEFT OUT OF THE HOUSING MARKET.
THE HOUSING MARKET
THAT THEY WERE EXPOSED TO
WAS LARGELY PUBLIC HOUSING.
AND PUBLIC HOUSING,
FIRST OF ALL, WAS BUILT
ALMOST EXCLUSIVELY,
WITH A FEW EXCEPTIONS,
IN THE CENTRAL CITY.
AND AFTER WORLD WAR II
WE STARTED BUILDING
LARGER AND LARGER
PUBLIC HOUSING PROJECTS,
WHICH WERE CALLED
VERTICAL GHETTOS.
ALL OF A SUDDEN
YOU WERE CONCENTRATING
LARGE NUMBERS OF POOR PEOPLE
OF COLOR IN ONE PLACE.
Narrator:
ANOTHER FEDERAL PROGRAM,
URBAN RENEWAL,
WAS SUPPOSED TO MAKE CITIES
MORE LIVABLE.
90% OF ALL HOUSING
DESTROYED BY URBAN RENEWAL
WAS NOT REPLACED.
TWO-THIRDS OF THOSE DISPLACED
WERE BLACK OR LATINO.
Lyndon Johnson:
FAIR HOUSING FOR ALL,
ALL HUMAN BEINGS
WHO LIVE IN THIS COUNTRY
IS NOW A PART
OF THE AMERICAN WAY OF LIFE.
Narrator:
IN 1968, PRESIDENT JOHNSON
SIGNED THE FAIR HOUSING ACT.
FOR THE FIRST TIME,
RACIAL LANGUAGE WAS REMOVED
FROM FEDERAL HOUSING POLICY.
NON-WHITE FAMILIES BEGAN MOVING
INTO TRADITIONALLY
WHITE COMMUNITIES IN NUMBERS.
Woman: WE LIVED IN AN APARTMENT,
A TWO-FAMILY HOUSE IN QUEENS.
AND WHEN WE CAME HERE
IT WAS THE FIRST TIME
WE HAD BOUGHT A HOUSE.
AND I WAS LOOKING FOR EVERYTHING
IN THE STORYBOOKS.
Narrator:
THE FRISBYS MOVED FROM QUEENS
TO SUBURBAN ROOSEVELT,
ONLY A FEW MILES
FROM LEVITTOWN.
LIKE THE FRISBYS,
MANY NON-WHITE FAMILIES
WOULD DISCOVER
THE ECONOMIC VALUE OF RACE
IN THE REAL ESTATE MARKET.
THEY WATCHED AS THEIR HOMES
AND NEIGHBORHOODS IN SUBURBIA
DECLINED PRECISELY BECAUSE
THEY HAD MOVED INTO THEM.
Frisby: WHEN I MOVED
INTO A NEIGHBORHOOD,
I THOUGHT IT WOULD STAY INTACT
THE WAY IT WAS.
ON THE STREET THAT I MOVED ON
WHEN I MOVED THERE,
IT WAS PREDOMINATELY WHITE.
WITHIN TWO YEARS
IT WAS PREDOMINATELY BLACK.
Narrator:
IT WAS CALLED BLOCKBUSTING.
REAL ESTATE AGENTS PREYED
ON THE RACIAL FEARS
OF WHITE HOMEOWNERS,
TO GET THEM
TO SELL THEIR HOMES QUICKLY
FOR LESS THAN MARKET VALUE.
THE HOMES WERE RESOLD
TO NON-WHITES
AT INFLATED PRICES.
Woman:
WELL, THEY WOULD SAY,
YOU KNOW, WE'RE HAVING
BLACK PEOPLE MOVE IN.
NOW, I WILL GIVE YOU CASH IF
YOU WANT TO SELL ME YOUR HOUSE.
DO YOU WANT TO STAY WITH
BLACK PEOPLE NEXT DOOR TO YOU?
AND THAT'S THE WAY IT WENT ON.
AND AS BUNNY SAID,
A LOT OF THE PEOPLE
JUST SAID YES,
I'LL TAKE THE MONEY AND RUN.
AND THAT'S THE START
OF THE WHITE PEOPLE LEAVING.
Narrator: AS MORE
BLACK AND LATINO FAMILIES
MOVED TO ROOSEVELT,
REAL ESTATE BECAME
MORE AND MORE DEPRESSED,
JUST AS THE FHA HAD PREDICTED.
BUT WHY?
Man: I HAVE AN IDEA MY HOUSE
IS PROBABLY WORTH AROUND
120 IN THIS TOWN.
BUT IT WOULD BE WORTH
IN MONTOUR
OR GARDEN CITY
OR SOME OTHER PLACE...
PROBABLY AROUND
200,000 OR BETTER.
NOW YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT 80,000.
YOU SAID TO ME ONE TIME
ABOUT WHY DO PEOPLE
DISLIKE THE BLACKS?
WELL, MONEY-WISE,
THERE'S A REASON.
NOT THAT YOU DISLIKE
THE BLACKS SO MUCH,
BUT YOU DISLIKE WHAT HAPPENS
WHEN A COMMUNITY TURNS
FROM WHITE TO BLACK.
Narrator: IT WASN'T
AFRICAN-AMERICANS MOVING IN
THAT CAUSED HOUSING VALUES
TO GO DOWN IN ROOSEVELT
AND OTHER NEIGHBORHOODS,
IT WAS WHITES LEAVING.
Man: WHEN A NEIGHBORHOOD,
A PREVIOUSLY WHITE NEIGHBORHOOD
STARTS TO INTEGRATE,
EVEN IF INDIVIDUAL WHITES
DON'T HAVE PERSONAL
OR PSYCHOLOGICAL ANIMOSITY
AND RACIAL HATRED,
THEY STILL HAVE
AN ECONOMIC INCENTIVE TO LEAVE.
BECAUSE THEY RECOGNIZE
THAT OTHERS
MIGHT MAKE THE SAME CALCULATION
AND LEAVE FIRST.
SO YOU GET A VICIOUS CIRCLE
WHERE WHITES CALCULATE THAT
OTHER WHITES ARE GOING TO SELL
WHEN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
INTEGRATES,
THEREFORE THEY WANT TO
SELL FIRST TO AVOID LOSSES,
AND THEY ACTUALLY
MAKE IT HAPPEN,
THEY MAKE WHITE FLIGHT HAPPEN.
AND IF YOU THINK ABOUT
AFRICAN AMERICANS,
IF AFRICAN AMERICANS
ARE 20% OF THAT MARKET,
IT MEANS THAT 80% OF THE PEOPLE
ARE NOT LOOKING
IN THOSE PLACES FOR HOMES.
SO THE PRICES OF THOSE HOMES
DECLINES OR STAYS STABLE.
AND BANKS CONTRIBUTE TO THIS
BY CONTINUALLY MAKING LOANS
IN REGIONS
THAT ARE ON THE RISE,
WHITE COMMUNITIES,
AND MAKING IT DIFFICULT TO
GET LOANS IN BLACK COMMUNITIES.
SO THERE'S A DIFFERENCE,
THERE'S A LACK OF SYMMETRY
THAT'S IMPORTANT
TO KEEP IN MIND.
SO IT'S NOT THE SAME
WHEN WHITES ARE BY THEMSELVES.
BECAUSE WHEN THEY ARE
BY THEMSELVES,
THEY'RE TAKING
ALL THE RESOURCES WITH THEM.
THEY'RE TAKING ALL
THE AMENITIES WITH THEM.
BUT WHEN BLACKS
ARE BY THEMSELVES,
THEY CAN'T GET LOANS,
THEY DON'T HAVE
A DECENT TAX BASE,
THERE ARE NO JOBS.
AND THEN THAT BECOMES ASSOCIATED
WITH BLACK SPACE.
Narrator: IN THE END,
WHAT HAPPENED TO ROOSEVELT
HAPPENS IN MANY NEIGHBORHOODS
WHEN WHITE FAMILIES
AND BUSINESSES FLEE.
THE TAX BASE ERODED.
SCHOOLS AND SERVICES DECLINED.
THE TOWN WAS SEEN
BY COUNTY OFFICIALS
AS A LEGITIMATE DUMPING GROUND
FOR WELFARE FAMILIES.
Powell: AT ONE POINT
WE HAD EXPLICIT LAWS
THAT SAYS WHITES ARE ON TOP
AND BLACKS ARE ON THE BOTTOM.
TODAY WE HAVE
MANY OF THE SAME PRACTICES
WITHOUT THE EXPLICIT LANGUAGE.
AND THOSE PRACTICES ARE LARGELY
INSCRIBED IN GEOGRAPHY.
AND SO GEOGRAPHY DOES THE WORK
OF JIM CROW LAWS.
SO, MANY PEOPLE ARE CONFUSED,
AS WHY AFTER 50 YEARS
OF CIVIL RIGHTS
ARE OUR SCHOOLS
STILL SEGREGATED,
WHY ARE HOUSING
MARKETS STILL SEGREGATED,
WHY ARE OUR JOBS
STILL SEGREGATED?
AND AGAIN, A LOT OF THIS
IS A FUNCTION OF
HOW WE'VE RE-INSCRIBED
THE RACIAL GEOGRAPHIC SPACE
IN THE UNITED STATES.
THAT STRUCTURE IS STILL
WHAT WE'RE LIVING WITH TODAY.
Narrator:
AS HOMES IN WHITE COMMUNITIES
APPRECIATED IN VALUE,
THE NET WORTH
OF THESE WHITE FAMILIES GREW.
FOR MOST NON-WHITE FAMILIES
WHO STAYED
IN URBAN NEIGHBORHOODS,
THE HOUSING MARKET OPEN TO THEM
IN THE '50s AND '60s
WAS LARGELY A RENTAL MARKET.
YOU DON'T GAIN EQUITY
BY PAYING RENT.
Conley: WHERE ONE'S FAMILY
LIVES IN AMERICA
IS NOT JUST A MATTER
OF TASTE AND PREFERENCE.
YOU HAVE THE ISSUE
OF HOUSING AND WEALTH.
THE MAJORITY OF AMERICANS
HOLD MOST OF THEIR WEALTH
IN THE FORM OF HOME EQUITY.
SO, THAT'S THEIR NEST EGG,
THAT'S HOW THEY CAN FINANCE
THE EDUCATION
OF THEIR OFFSPRING.
THAT'S HOW THEY CAN
SORT OF SAVE UP FOR RETIREMENT.
IT'S THEIR SAVINGS BANK, RIGHT,
THEY'RE LIVING
IN THEIR SAVINGS BANK.
Powell: MY FAMILY,
LIKE A LOT OF FAMILIES,
WAS IN DETROIT,
STRUGGLING TO BUY A HOUSE.
YOU HAD A DUAL HOUSING MARKET,
ONE WHITE, ONE BLACK.
A HOUSING MARKET WITH ONE
WITH A LOT OF DEMAND,
ANOTHER HOUSING MARKET
WITH VERY LITTLE DEMAND.
MY FATHER LIVES IN THE HOUSE
THAT I GREW UP IN.
THAT HOUSE TODAY,
FIVE-BEDROOM HOUSE,
IS WORTH ABOUT $20,000.
THAT SAME HOUSE
BOUGHT IN THE SUBURBS
WOULD BE WORTH TODAY
ABOUT $320,000.
SO WHITES MOVING TO THE SUBURB
WERE BEING SUBSIDIZED
IN THE ACCUMULATION OF WEALTH,
WHILE BLACKS
WERE BEING DIVESTED.
AND THESE WERE
PUBLIC POLICY DECISIONS
IN WHICH ON ONE HAND
PEOPLE WERE GIVEN ACCESS
TO PROPERTY,
GIVEN TITLE,
AND SUBSEQUENTLY, WEALTH,
AND ON ANOTHER HAND,
WHERE PEOPLE WERE
NOT GIVEN ACCESS TO PROPERTY,
DID NOT GENERATE WEALTH,
AND DID NOT GENERATE
THE KIND OF OPPORTUNITY
FOR THE NEXT GENERATION.
SO IF YOU CAN GET
A GOVERNMENT LOAN
WITH YOUR G.I. BILL,
YOUR NEWLY EARNED COLLEGE DEGREE
AND BUY A HOUSE
IN AN ALL-WHITE AREA,
THAT THEN APPRECIATES IN VALUE
THAT THEN YOU CAN
PASS ON TO YOUR CHILDREN,
THEN YOU'RE PASSING ON WEALTH
THAT HAS ALL BEEN MADE
MORE AVAILABLE TO YOU
AS A CONSEQUENCE OF
RACIST POLICIES AND PRACTICES.
TO THE CHILD OF THAT PARENT,
IT LOOKS LIKE MY FATHER
WORKED HARD, BOUGHT A HOUSE,
PASSED HIS WEALTH ON TO ME,
MADE IT POSSIBLE
FOR ME TO GO TO SCHOOL,
MORTGAGED THAT HOUSE
SO I COULD HAVE, YOU KNOW,
A RELATIVELY
DEBT-FREE COLLEGE EXPERIENCE
AND HAS FINANCED
MY COLLEGE EDUCATION.
HOW COME
YOUR FATHER DIDN'T DO THAT?
YOU KNOW, WELL,
THERE ARE SOME GOOD REASONS
WHY MAYBE YOUR FATHER
HAD A HARDER TIME DOING IT
IF YOU'RE AFRICAN AMERICAN
OR LATINO OR NATIVE AMERICAN.
Powell:
AND THE THING THAT'S REALLY
SLICK ABOUT WHITENESS,
IF YOU WILL,
IS THAT MOST OF THE BENEFITS
CAN BE OBTAINED WITHOUT
EVER DOING ANYTHING PERSONALLY.
FOR WHITES, THEY'RE GETTING
THE SPOILS OF A RACIST SYSTEM,
EVEN IF THEY'RE NOT
PERSONALLY RACIST.
Narrator: TO GLIMPSE ONE OF
THE FAR-REACHING CONSEQUENCES
OF RACIAL INEQUALITY,
YOU NEED ONLY CONSIDER
ONE STATISTIC --
COMPARATIVE NET WORTH OR WEALTH.
IF YOU ADD UP EVERYTHING YOU OWN
AND SUBTRACT ALL YOUR DEBTS,
WHAT'S LEFT IS YOUR NET WORTH.
TODAY, THE AVERAGE BLACK FAMILY
HAS ONLY 1/8th THE NET WORTH
OR ASSETS
OF THE AVERAGE WHITE FAMILY.
THAT DIFFERENCE HAS
SEEMINGLY GROWN SINCE THE 1960s,
SINCE THE CIVIL RIGHTS TRIUMPHS,
AND IT'S NOT EXPLAINED
BY OTHER FACTORS,
LIKE EDUCATION,
EARNINGS RATES, SAVINGS RATES.
IT IS REALLY THE LEGACY
OF RACIAL INEQUALITY
FROM GENERATIONS PAST.
NO OTHER MEASURE
CAPTURES THE LEGACY,
THIS SORT OF CUMULATIVE
DISADVANTAGE OF RACE,
OR CUMULATIVE ADVANTAGE
OF RACE FOR WHITES,
THAN NET WORTH OR WEALTH.
Narrator:
EVEN WITH THE SAME INCOME,
WHITE FAMILIES HAVE ON AVERAGE
TWICE THE WEALTH
OF BLACK FAMILIES.
MUCH OF THAT DIFFERENCE LIES
IN THE VALUE OF THEIR HOMES.
BUT WHAT HAPPENS
WHEN WE COMPARE FAMILIES
ALONG THE COLOR LINE
WHO HAVE SIMILAR WEALTH?
Conley: WHEN YOU MAKE
THE RIGHT COMPARISON,
WHEN YOU COMPARE
A BLACK KID FROM A FAMILY
WITH THE SAME INCOME
AND WEALTH LEVEL
AS THE WHITE KID
FROM THE SIMILAR
ECONOMIC SITUATION,
RATES OF COLLEGE GRADUATION
ARE THE SAME.
RATES OF EMPLOYMENT
AND WORK HOURS ARE THE SAME.
RATES OF WELFARE USAGE
ARE THE SAME.
SO, WHEN WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT RACE
IN TERMS OF A CULTURAL
ACCOUNTING OF THESE DIFFERENCES
OR A GENETIC ACCOUNTING
OF THESE DIFFERENCES,
WE'RE REALLY
MISSING THE PICTURE,
BECAUSE WE'RE MAKING
THE WRONG COMPARISON.
Narrator: WE WANT TO BE
A COLORBLIND SOCIETY
THAT VALUES
THE CONTENT OF CHARACTER
OVER THE COLOR OF SKIN.
THE HOPE OF THOUSANDS OF
NEWCOMERS WHO ARRIVE EACH YEAR
IS THAT WE ALREADY ARE.
Woman: TO THE FLAG
OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
AND TO THE REPUBLIC...
Narrator: "I DON'T SEE COLOR,
I SEE PEOPLE,"
THE SAYING GOES.
Man: THERE ARE PEOPLE
FROM 100 OTHER NATIONS
WHO LOOK DIFFERENT FROM YOU.
PEOPLE WHOSE RELIGION,
HISTORY, SKIN COLOR,
AND REASON FOR BEING HERE TODAY
MAY BE DIFFERENT FROM YOURS.
Narrator: BUT IN
POST CIVIL RIGHTS AMERICA,
IS COLORBLINDNESS
THE SAME AS EQUALITY?
Bonilla-Silva:
THE NOTION OF COLORBLINDNESS
CAME TO US FROM THAT FAMOUS
"I HAVE A DREAM" SPEECH
OF DR. MARTIN LUTHER KING
WHERE HE SAID THAT PEOPLE
SHOULD BE JUDGED BY
THE CONTENT OF THEIR CHARACTER
AND NOT BY
THE COLOR OF THEIR SKIN.
AND WHAT HAS HAPPENED
IN THE POST CIVIL RIGHTS ERA
IS THAT WHITES HAVE ASSUMED
THAT WE'RE ALREADY THERE,
THAT WE'RE IN A SOCIETY
WHERE COLOR DOES NOT MATTER.
Conley: ON THE ONE HAND,
THE CIVIL RIGHTS ERA
OFFICIALLY ENDED
INEQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY,
DE JURE LEGAL INEQUALITY.
AT THE SAME TIME,
THOSE CIVIL RIGHTS TRIUMPHS
DID NOTHING TO ADDRESS
THE UNDERLYING ECONOMIC
AND SOCIAL INEQUALITIES
THAT HAD ALREADY BEEN IN PLACE.
DOESN'T RECOGNIZE THE FACT
THAT THE REWARDS, THE HOUSE,
THE LEXUS, THE BIG BANK ACCOUNT,
THOSE ARE NOT ONLY THE REWARDS,
OR THE POT OF GOLD
AT THE END OF THE GAME,
THEY'RE ALSO
THE STARTING POSITION
FOR THE NEXT GENERATION.
Narrator:
THE WEALTH GAP GROWS.
THE ADVANTAGES
OF BEING WHITE ACCUMULATE
FROM ONE GENERATION TO THE NEXT.
Tatum: WHAT ARE THE BENEFITS
OR THE ADVANTAGES
TO BEING WHITE IN A SOCIETY
THAT HAS HISTORICALLY
GIVEN BENEFITS AND ADVANTAGES
TO MEMBERS
OF THE DOMINANT GROUP?
AND IF YOU ARE A PERSON
WHO HAS THAT PRIVILEGE,
YOU DON'T NECESSARILY NOTICE IT.
Conley: SO UNTIL WE RECOGNIZE
THAT THERE'S REALLY NO WAY
TO TALK ABOUT
EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY
WITHOUT TALKING
ABOUT EQUALITY OF CONDITION,
THEN WE'RE STUCK WITH
THIS PARADOXICAL IDEA
OF A COLORBLIND SOCIETY
IN A SOCIETY
THAT'S TOTALLY UNEQUAL BY COLOR.
Narrator:
CLAIMING WE DON'T SEE RACE
WON'T END RACIAL INEQUALITY.
AS SUPREME COURT JUSTICE
HARRY BLACKMUN SAID,
"TO GET BEYOND RACISM
"WE MUST FIRST
TAKE ACCOUNT OF RACE.
THERE IS NO OTHER WAY."
AND JUST AS WE'RE BORN
INTO THE SYSTEM,
WE DON'T ASK TO BE LOADED UP
WITH STEREOTYPES
OR OMISSIONS OR DISTORTIONS
WHEN WE COME INTO THE WORLD.
WE DON'T ASK TO BE
IN A STRUCTURE WHICH IS UNFAIR,
BUT THAT'S WHAT
WE HAVE INHERITED.
WHETHER YOU IDENTIFY AS
A PERSON OF COLOR,
WHETHER YOU IDENTIFY
AS A WHITE PERSON,
IT DOESN'T MATTER.
I THINK
WE HAVE TO BE UNCOMFORTABLE
WITH THE PRESENT
RACIAL ARRANGEMENT.
IN A SENSE I THINK WE HAVE TO BE
WILING TO BE UNCOMFORTABLE,
WILLING TO DEMAND
MORE OF OURSELVES
AND MORE OF OUR COUNTRY...
AND WILLING TO MAKE
THE INVISIBLE VISIBLE.
Tatum: I THINK WE ALL
HAVE TO THINK ABOUT
WHAT CAN I INFLUENCE?
I DON'T INFLUENCE EVERYTHING,
BUT THE THINGS I DO INFLUENCE
I CAN THINK ABOUT
HOW AM I MAKING THIS
A MORE EQUITABLE ENVIRONMENT?
I CAN ASK MYSELF,
WHO'S INCLUDED IN THIS PICTURE
AND WHO ISN'T?
WHO'S HAD OPPORTUNITIES
IN MY ENVIRONMENT
AND WHO HASN'T?
WHAT CAN I DO ABOUT THAT?
TO LEARN MORE ABOUT
RETHINKING RACE,
VISIT PBS ONLINE
AT pbs.org.
TO ORDER THE VIDEO SET
OF "RACE: THE POWER
OF AN ILLUSION,"
CALL...
MAJOR FUNDING
FOR THIS PROGRAM PROVIDED BY
THE FORD FOUNDATION,
A RESOURCE
FOR INNOVATIVE PEOPLE
AND INSTITUTIONS WORLDWIDE,
AND THE CORPORATION
FOR PUBLIC BROADCASTING.
ADDITIONAL FUNDING
PROVIDED BY THESE FUNDERS --